---
layout: post
title: My first foray into CI/CD
date: 2022-06-10
categories: [CI/CD, Github Actions]
tags: [cicd,github,githubactions]
---

# My first foray into CI/CD
A few days ago, I came across a YouTube video that showed Jekyll generating a static site. This interested me and after doing some extra reading I found that it was also possible to create a blog as well. Even better than that, it is possible to host said blog for free on GitHub.
I'm not recommending that what I have done here is the best way to use GitHub actions, and I am currently working to improve the workflows that are used as examples in this post.

## Some backstory
This blog originally started life as a WordPress blog on Amazon's AWS EC2 servers. However, once my free tier expired, I started getting a bill of around £7 per month for minimal traffic to the site. I had been using Linode servers for a few other projects and decided that I was going to migrate the blog to a ghost CMS site on their smallest nodes. This should have brought prices down to around £4 a month. But as always, migration was slow, and so I just ended up paying £11 for a blog split across 2 servers. Not ideal! So what to do now? Well, I've exported the contents of the WordPress blog and imported it to a stack running on my local docker server. I now plan to pull the relevant posts off the local server and migrate them here. (There were a couple of posts about how cheap the AWS servers were, which now in hindsight is not true.) During this process, I realized that GitHub Actions was a very good answer to maintaining a few docker images I have.

## So what are GitHub Actions?
GitHub actions are a way to streamline the deployment of software from the workspace where the code lives. So how does it work? Very simply, we put together a YAML file (which we also store in the repository) that has all the steps we need to build and publish our project. Sound simple so far? In theory, yes, it is quite simple. The complexity starts coming from how powerful and flexible it is. GitHub has a so-called marketplace (is it a marketplace if everything is free?) full of different actions that you can perform. From just sending a message to a new user, submitting their first PR to your repo, to a full-blown build and deployment of a game to the Steam servers, and everything in between. And because of how flexible the system is, we find there is most definitely more than one way to skin the cat. (Not sure if there's a more updated version of that expression?!) 

## My first GitHub action workflow
The first GitHub action I used was the default action that came with my Jekyll template. And taking a look at it, I thought, “How hard could it be?”. It turns out that the last of the three-step workflow called a 160-line shell script ran considerably more steps than I thought. However, that action was doing exactly what I needed it to do, so I didn't delve too much into it. Instead, I did a Google looking for some examples of how I wanted my workflow to work. The idea I had was to have a file that lives in my repo that I could update, which would then trigger a new image to be built. The only problem being I had no idea how to do that.
To start with, I grabbed the `Simple workflow` template, from the marketplace, and started modifying it. After a bit of researching, I found a Stack Overflow thread that said you could read the contents of a file into the action environment variable (ENV). So now as long as my variable file follows the pattern key=value, then each line will be read in as a new ENV. This led to the cobbled-together workflow below:

``` yml
# This is a basic workflow to help you get started with Actions

name: CI

# Controls when the workflow will run
on:
  # Triggers the workflow on push or pull request events but only for the "main" branch
  push:
    branches: [ "main" ]

  # Allows you to run this workflow manually from the Actions tab
  workflow_dispatch:

# A workflow run is made up of one or more jobs that can run sequentially or in parallel
jobs:
  # This workflow contains a single job called "build"
  build:
    # The type of runner that the job will run on
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest

    # Steps represent a sequence of tasks that will be executed as part of the job
    steps:
      - uses: actions/checkout@v3
      
      - name: Assign var to ENV
        run: |
          cat ./testvar >> $GITHUB_ENV
          
      - name: Echo env
        run: echo $test
```

Which of course returns the message `hello world`.

## A basic GitHub action workflow for docker
It turns out building the Dockerfile isn't too hard. I already had docker commands written out for when I was building the images locally. So for a really quick start, you can stick your command into a `run`:` step, and hey presto you have built your first docker image in the cloud. It's not quite that simple, but it's not far off. Here is a very basic example of building a docker image:
Let's break down that code block and see what's going on here.
``` yml
name: Build docker image
on: [push]
```
The first line is pretty self-explanatory. It gives your workflow a name. This is nice as you can see it in the log of which events have run. The second line is a little more interesting and specifies what triggers the workflow to run. In our case, it is when someone pushed changes to the repo (or committed from the web interface). Starting early, there are even options for this. 
``` yml
on:
  push:
    branches: [ "main" ]
```
This snippet will only trigger the workflow when pushing changes into the main branch of the repo. Next, we move on to the part that tells the runners (the name GitHub has given to the servers that do the work) what to do.
``` yml 
jobs:
  push:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    permissions:
      packages: write
      contents: read
    steps:
      - uses: actions/checkout@v2
      - run: docker build .
```
Line 2 defines that this section is to be run when a push happens. In line 3 we tell the system what OS we would like to run the steps on. GitHub provides macOS, Linux, and Windows runners for our use. And finally, lines 4 through 6 (and onwards) are the steps that will be performed on that runner. For us, this is just to create a copy of the repo and then one simple command to build the docker image. NB, the Ubuntu image comes with Docker pre-installed. So now we have our simple workflow that builds a docker image. The only problem now is we destroy the image along with the container at the end of the workflow.

## Building and keeping our docker image
The next issue to solve was to be able to keep the image we have built. It turns out the easiest way is just to push the image to a registry.
Now, I'm slightly ashamed to say I have been running a personal docker registry on my server, but it was badly configured. While I was able to pull images from it over the internet, somewhere along the line I had messed up the TLS settings, which meant I couldn't push to it. No biggie, I had thought. I can push to it locally and then just pull from it when I want to use the images. I know it was a bad idea to run a misconfigured server but, with the best intentions, I thought I would fix it within a couple of days. But maintenance issues built up in work and, like London buses, my watchtower emails suddenly all come together with huge lists of updates. So I forgot about the registry and just tried to keep up with updating my containers.
I digress, but my forgetting about the registry came to light again when I decided to try to push the images to that registry. Needless to say, it didn't work.
As my local registry wasn't an option, I'd need to find a new place to store my images. Initially, I thought that the docker registry might be a good option, but with the limit of only one private repo, I felt that was not enough whilst trying to build a new image. The second option that I went with was the GitHub Container Registry (ghcr.io). The visibility of your image on ghcr.io is initially inherited from your repo's visibility, but this is easy to change if you wish.